>> Sreenivasan: ROCKET-FIRE AND
AIR-STRIKES IN GAZA GRIND TO A
STANDSTILL AS ISRAEL AND HAMAS
AGREE TO AN OPEN-ENDED CEASE-
FIRE.
GOOD EVENING, I'M GWEN IFILL,
JUDY WOODRUFF IS AWAY.
ALSO AHEAD THIS TUESDAY, BURGER
KING'S MEGA-PURCHASE OF A
CANADIAN RESTAURANT CHAIN, AND
THE RELOCATION OF IT'S
HEADQUARTERS TO ONTARIO, HERE
THE CORPORATE TAX RATE IS LOWER.
PLUS, OUR SERIES ON "RETHINKING
COLLEGE," ZEROES IN ON THE
TRILLION DOLLAR STUDENT DEBT
BURDEN
>> WE'VE TRAVELED AROUND
WISCONSIN, AND WE'VE TALKED TO
PEOPLE OF ALL AGES ABOUT THEIR
STUDENT LOAN DEBT AND IT'S SOUL
CRUSHING FOR THEM, THEY'RE
SAYING ALL I WANT TO DO IS GO TO
COLLEGE, AND NOW I'VE GOT A 25-
YEAR OBLIGATION.
>> Ifill: THOSE ARE JUST SOME OF
THE STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Ifill: THE LEADERS OF RUSSIA
AND UKRAINE CAME FACE TO FACE
TODAY.
THEY AGREED TO HAVE THEIR BORDER
GUARDS CONSULT, BUT OTHERWISE
THERE WAS LITTLE SIGN OF
PROGRESS.
THE MEETING UNFOLDED AS KIEV
CLAIMED NEW PROOF THAT RUSSIAN
TROOPS ARE INSIDE UKRAINE.
>> Ifill: IT WAS THE FIRST
ENCOUNTER BETWEEN RUSSIAN
PRESIDENT VLADIMIR PUTIN
AND UKRAINIAN PRESIDENT PETRO
POROSHENKO SINCE JUNE.
THEY JOINED OTHER EUROPEAN
LEADERS AT A SUMMIT IN BELARUS.
>> ( translated ): TODAY IN
MINSK, WITHOUT ANY DOUBT, THE
FATE OF EUROPE AND THE FATE OF
THE WORLD IS BEING DECIDED.
WE SHOULD TOGETHER FIND THE ONLY
CORRECT SOLUTION UPON WHICH
NOTHING LESS THAN PEACE ON THE
CONTINENT DEPENDS.
>> Ifill: POROSHENKO CALLED FOR
IMPOSING STRONGER CONTROLS ON
THE BORDER WITH RUSSIA, AND FOR
CUTTING OFF ARMS SUPPLIES TO
PRO-RUSSIAN REBELS.
ON THE RUSSIAN SIDE, PRESIDENT
PUTIN SAID THE CRISIS CANNOT BE
RESOLVED WITHOUT PEACEFUL
DIALOGUE.
>> ( translated ): I'D LIKE TO
STRESS THAT WE ARE READY TO
DISCUSS ANY VARIANTS OF OUR
COOPERATION BASED ON
CONSIDERATION FOR EACH OTHER'S
INTERESTS.
WE ARE READY TO EXCHANGE
OPINIONS ON THE CURRENT ACUTE
CRISIS IN UKRAINE WHICH I'M SURE
CANNOT BE SOLVED BY FURTHER
ESCALATION OF MILITARY ACTIONS,
>> Ifill: THE ONE-ON-ONE MEETING
OF PUTIN AND POROSHENKO FINALLY
TOOK PLACE LATE AT NIGHT, HOSTED
BY THE PRESIDENT OF BELARUS.
>> ( translated ): TALKS WERE
NOT EASY, BUT THE DIALOGUE WAS
SUBSTANTIVE AND EXTREMELY FRANK.
IT IS ALREADY VALUABLE AND
IMPORTANT THAT THIS DIALOGUE
TOOK PLACE.
>> Ifill: BUT MILITARY ACTION
ONLY INTENSIFIED IN SOUTHEASTERN
UKRAINE.
IT WAS THE SECOND DAY OF
FIGHTING AROUND NOVOAZOVSK,
WHICH LIES CLOSE TO THE MAJOR
PORT OF MARIUPOL, AND ON THE
SAME ROAD THAT LEADS TO THE
RUSSIAN-ANNEXED CRIMEA
PENINSULA.
UKRAINE ALSO CHARGED THAT A
RUSSIAN HELICOPTER ATTACKED A
BORDER POST YESTERDAY, KILLING
FOUR GUARDS.
AND KIEV RELEASED SOUND AND
VIDEO OF WHAT IT SAID WERE 10
CAPTURED RUSSIAN SOLDIERS.
SEVERAL COMPLAINED ABOUT THEIR
GOVERNMENT'S ACTIONS.
>> ( translated ): STOP SENDING
THE MEN HERE, STOP IT, IT
SHOULDN'T BE HAPPENING.
WHY IS THIS BEING DONE, IT'S NOT
OUR WAR?
IT'S NOT OUR WAR AND IF WE
WEREN'T HERE THEN NONE OF THIS
WOULD BE HAPPENING.
THEY WOULD HAVE SORTED OUT THEIR
STATE AND THEIR OWN PROBLEMS BY
THEMSELVES.
>> Ifill: MOSCOW SAID THE
SOLDIERS ACCIDENTALLY STRAYED
ACROSS THE BORDER.
>> Ifill: THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION WOULD NOT CONFIRM
REPORTS TODAY THAT U-S PLANES
ARE CONDUCTING SURVEILLANCE
FLIGHTS OVER SYRIA.
THEY COULD SET THE STAGE FOR AIR
STRIKES ON "ISLAMIC STATE"
MILITANTS THERE.
THE PENTAGON'S MAIN SPOKESMAN,
REAR ADMIRAL JOHN KIRBY,
DECLINED TO SAY DIRECTLY IF THE
FLIGHTS ARE UNDER WAY.
HE DID ACKNOWLEDGE THERE'S A LOT
TO LEARN ABOUT THE GROUP.
>> WE RECOGNIZE THAT THEIR
DEVELOPMENT, THEIR GROWTH, THE
INCREASE IN THEIR CAPABILITIES,
IT HASN'T HAPPENED OVERNIGHT,
AND IT HAS HAPPENED REGIONALLY,
THAT THEY OPERATE PRETTY MUCH
FREELY BETWEEN IRAQ AND SYRIA.
DO WE HAVE PERFECT INFORMATION
ABOUT THEM AND THEIR
CAPABILITIES WHETHER IT'S ON THE
SYRIAN SIDE OR THE IRAQI SIDE O
THE BORDER, NO, WE DON'T.
>> Ifill: PRESIDENT OBAMA MADE
NO MENTION OF SURVEILLANCE
FLIGHTS IN HIS SPEECH TODAY, BUT
HE CAUTIONED THAT ROOTING OUT
THE "ISLAMIC STATE" GROUP WILL
NOT BE EASY.
HE ALSO VOWED THE KILLERS OF
JOURNALIST JAMES FOLEY WILL BE
BROUGHT TO JUSTICE.
HE SAID, "AMERICA DOES NOT
FORGET."
THERE'S ALSO WORD THE PERSIAN
GULF STATE OF QATAR IS WORKING
TO SECURE THE RELEASE OF FOUR
MORE AMERICAN HOSTAGES IN SYRIA.
THE REUTERS NEWS SERVICE
REPORTED THAT DEVELOPMENT TODAY,
CITING AN UNNAMED SOURCE IN THE
GULF.
QATAR HELPED FREE AMERICAN
JOURNALIST PETER THEO CURTIS ON
SUNDAY.
HE'D BEEN A HOSTAGE IN SYRIA FOR
TWO YEARS.
IN AFGHANISTAN, PRESIDENTIAL
CANDIDATE ABDULLAH ABDULLAH
THREATENED TO PULL OUT OF A
U.N.-SUPERVISED AUDIT OF THE
DISPUTED RUN-OFF ELECTION.
HIS CAMP SAID NONE OF THE
FRAUDULENT VOTES ARE BEING
THROWN OUT.
ABDULLAH LED IN THE INITIAL
VOTING, BUT FORMER FINANCE
MINISTER ASHRAF GHANI FINISHED
FIRST IN THE RUNOFF.
THE SCANDAL AT THE DEPARTMENT OF
VETERANS AFFAIRS BROUGHT A NEW
PRESIDENTIAL PLEDGE TODAY.
THE AGENCY HAS FACED DISCLOSURES
OF LENGTHY WAIT TIMES FOR HEALTH
CARE, AND OF FALSIFIED RECORDS.
PRESIDENT OBAMA DEFENDED HIS
RESPONSE TO THE SCANDAL.
BUT, AT THE AMERICAN LEGION
CONVENTION, IN CHARLOTTE, NORTH
CAROLINA, HE SAID THERE'S MUCH
MORE TO DO.
>> WE ARE VERY CLEAR ABOUT THE
PROBLEMS THAT ARE STILL THERE,
AND THOSE PROBLEMS REQUIRE US TO
REGAIN THE TRUST OF OUR VETERANS
AND LIVE UP TO OUR VISION OF A
V.A. THAT IS MORE EFFECTIVE AND
MORE EFFICIENT AND THAT TRULY
PUTS VETERANS FIRST, AND I WILL
NOT SATISFIED UNTIL THAT
HAPPENS.
>> Ifill: THE PRESIDENT ALSO
ANNOUNCED STEPS TO IMPROVE
ACCESS TO MENTAL HEALTH CARE FOR
ACTIVE-DUTY TROOPS AND VETERANS.
SEPARATELY, V.A. OFFICIALS SAID
AN INVESTIGATION FOUND NO PROOF
THAT DELAYS IN CARE AT ITS
PHOENIX HOSPITAL CAUSED ANY
DEATHS.
THE WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION IS
NOW OFFICIALLY TARGETING
ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES.
CLOSE AT 4,570.
AND THE S-AND-P 500 ADDED TWO
POINTS, TO FINISH ABOVE 2 FOR
THE FIRST TIME.
STILL TO COME ON THE NEWSHOUR:
HAMAS AND ISRAEL REACH A
CEASEFIRE DEAL;
WHY BURGER KING AND OTHER
COMPANIES ARE RELOCATING OUTSIDE
THE U.S;
THE HIGH COST OF COLLEGE MEANS
MORE STUDENTS WITH SUBSTANTIAL
DEBT;
MARGARET WARNER REPORTS ON THE
PROSPECTS FOR POLITICAL
RECONCILIATION AMONG IRAQ'S
SUNNIS, SHIITES AND KURDS;
AND, AN ARIZONA RANCHER'S TAKE
ON THE BORDER CRISIS.
>> Ifill: IN THE MIDDLE EAST-
THE BLOODY BATTLE BETWEEN ISRAEL
AND HAMAS WHICH TOOK THOUSANDS
OF LIVES THIS SUMMER APPEARS TO
BE ENDING.
A NEW CEASE-FIRE WAS ANNOUNCED
THIS AFTERNOON.
>> Ifill: CELEBRATORY GUNFIRE
RANG OUT IN GAZA CITY, WHERE
PEOPLE POURED INTO THE STREETS
ON NEWS THAT SEVEN WEEKS OF WAR
MIGHT FINALLY BE OVER.
THE FORMAL ANNOUNCEMENT CAME
FROM EGYPT, WHICH MEDIATED
TALKS, ON AND OFF, FOR WEEKS.
IN ITS ESSENTIALS, THE STATEMENT
SAID:
ISRAEL AND HAMAS ACCEPTED WHAT
THEY CALLED AN OPEN-ENDED TRUCE.
AND ISRAEL AGREED TO OPEN MORE
BORDER CROSSINGS, ALLOWING
HUMANITARIAN AID AND
CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS INTO
GAZA.
PALESTINIAN AUTHORITY PRESIDENT
MAHMOUD ABBAS, WHO LOST CONTROL
OF GAZA TO HAMAS IN 2007, IS
EXPECTED TO TAKE OVER
ADMINISTERING GAZA'S BORDERS.
>> ( translated ): WE HOPE THAT
THIS WILL FULFILL THE DEMANDS
AND NEEDS OF OUR PEOPLE IN GAZA
AND PROVIDE ALL THEIR FOOD AND
MEDICAL REQUIREMENTS AND TO
BEGIN THE REBUILDING OF ALL THAT
HAD BEEN DESTROYED.
>> Ifill: IF THE CEASE-FIRE
HOLDS, NEW TALKS ON OTHER ISSUES
WOULD BEGIN IN A MONTH.
THOSE ISSUES COULD RANGE FROM
HAMAS DEMANDS TO REBUILD GAZA'S
BOMBED-OUT AIRPORT AND CONSTRUCT
A SEAPORT, TO ISRAEL'S DEMAND
THAT HAMAS DISARM.
THE TERMS OF THE CEASE FIRE DEAL
CONTAINED NO MAJOR CONCESSION BY
THE ISRAELIS.
BUT HAMAS SAID THERE'S NO DOUBT
WHO WON THIS LATEST WAR.
>> WE ARE HERE TODAY, AFTER
ACHIEVING AN AGREEMENT BETWEEN
THE TWO SIDES, TO ANNOUNCE THE
VICTORY OF RESISTANCE.
WE ARE HERE TODAY TO ANNOUNCE
THE VICTORY OF GAZA.
>> Ifill: ON THE ISRAELI SIDE, R
BENJAMIN NETANYAHU PAINTED THE
OUTCOME DIFFERENTLY.
>> ISRAEL HAS ACCEPTED THE
EGYPTIAN CEASE-FIRE PROPOSAL, WE
HOPE THAT THIS TIME THE CEASE-
FIRE WILL STICK, AND I THINK NOW
THAT AS THE DUST WILL BEGIN TO
CLEAR, MANY PEOPLE WILL BE
ASKING, WHY IS IT THAT TODAY
HAMAS ACCEPTED THE VERY SAME
EGYPTIAN FRAMEWORK THAT IT
REJECTED A MONTH AGO, ULTIMATELY
SO MUCH BLOODSHED COULD HAVE
BEEN AVOIDED.
>> Ifill: THE CEASE-FIRE
FOLLOWED ANOTHER NIGHT OF
ISRAELI AIR STRIKES ON HIGH-RISE
BUILDINGS IN GAZA.
THEY LEVELED A 15-STORY
APARTMENT AND OFFICE COMPLEX AND
SEVERELY DAMAGED ANOTHER.
BY DAY, PALESTINIANS VIEWED THE
DESTRUCTION THAT LEFT 25 PEOPLE
WOUNDED.
THE BUILDINGS HAD LARGELY BEEN
EVACUATED BEFORE THE BOMBINGS,
AFTER ISRAELI WARNINGS.
THE FINAL HOURS OF FIGHTING ALSO
SAW MORE ROCKETS HIT SOUTHERN
ISRAEL.
ONE STRUCK A HOME IN ASHKELON,
INJURING A DOZEN PEOPLE.
AND, A MORTAR STRIKE KILLED ONE
ISRAELI.
IN WASHINGTON, THE STATE
DEPARTMENT CAUTIOUSLY WELCOMED
THE PROSPECT OF AN END TO THE
KILLING.
SPOKESWOMAN JEN PSAKI.
>> WE VIEW THIS AS AN
OPPORTUNITY, NOT A CERTAINTY.
TODAY'S AGREEMENT COMES AFTER
MANY HOURS AND DAYS OF
NEGOTIATIONS AND DISCUSSIONS,
BUT, CERTAINLY, THERE'S A LONG
ROAD AHEAD AND WE'RE AWARE OF
THAT, AND WE'RE GOING INTO THIS
EYES WIDE OPEN.
>> Ifill: GAZAN OFFICIALS SAY
MORE THAN 2,100 PALESTINIANS
DIED DURING THE CONFLICT, WITH
HALF A MILLION DISPLACED.
ON THE ISRAELI SIDE, 69 WERE
KILLED, ALL BUT FIVE OF THEM
SOLDIERS.
>> Ifill: FOR MORE ON WHERE
THINGS GO FROM HERE, I'M JOINED
BY DENNIS ROSS, A LONGTIME U.S.
DIPLOMAT AND MIDDLE EAST ENVOY,
WHO SERVED IN THE GEORGE H.W.
BUSH, CLINTON AND OBAMA
ADMINISTRATIONS.
HE'S NOW A COUNSELOR AT THE
WASHINGTON INSTITUTE FOR NEAR
EAST POLICY.
AND SHIBLEY TELHAMI, THE ANWAR
SADAT PROFESSOR OF PEACE AND
DEVELOPMENT AT THE UNIVERSITY OF
MARYLAND, SENIOR FELLOW AT THE
BROOKINGS INSTITUTION, AND
AUTHOR OF THE BOOK "THE WORLD
THROUGH ARAB EYES."
GENTLEMEN, WELCOME BACK TO THE
"NewsHour".
>> PLEASURE.
>> Ifill: SO WE HAVE TALKED
ABOUT THIS BEFORE.
DENNIS ROSS, YOU'VE CERTAINLY
BEEN ON THE OTHER SIDE OF THE
NEGOTIATING TABLE BEFORE.
DOES THIS CEASE FIRE SEEM REAL
TO YOU?
>> IT DOES SEEM REAL TO ME
BECAUSE I THINK BOTH SIDES
REALLY WANT THIS TO BE OVER.
NEITHER SIDE KNEW, AT THIS
POINT, THAT THERE WAS MUCH MORE
THAT COULD BE GAINED AND THEY
EACH SAW THE PRICE THEY WERE
PAYING WAS ONE THAT WAS GOING TO
CONTINUE TO GO UP.
WE CAN LOOK AT IT AS A PRICE NOT
BEING EQUAL TO THE TWO SIDES BUT
HOW DOES EACH SIDE EVALUATE
THOSE COSTS?
I THINK FOR THE ISRAELIS, THEY
HAD DESTROYED THE TUNNELS.
IF THEY BAND TO GO IN AND STOP
THE MORTARS, THEY WOULD HAVE TO
GO IN ON THE GROUND AGAIN AND
TAKE OVER GAZA, WHICH WAS TOO
HIGH A PRICE TO PAY.
THEY ACHIEVED WHAT THEY WERE
GOING TO ACHIEVE MILITARILY.
FOR HAMAS, IF YOU LOOK AT THE
ROCKETS THEY HAD LEFT, IF THEY
KEPT FIRING, THEY WOULD DEPLETE
THE ARSENAL AND THE PRICE IN
GAZA WAS GOING UP.
SO EACH WAS LOOKING FOR A WAY
OUT AND THIS GIVES THEM A CHANCE
TO SUSTAIN SOMETHING.
>> Ifill: SHIBLEY TELHAMI, YOU
MARRIED IYOU -- YOU HEARD IN THE
HE DIDN'T UNDERSTAND WHY HAMAS
DIDN'T TAKE THE DEAL.
>> THE ISRAELIS GOT MORE OUT OF
IT IN SOME WAYS BUT OBVIOUSLY
THE IMMEDIATE OPENING OF THE
PASSAGES, THE CROSSINGS
PROVIDING RELIEF IS SOMETHING TO
GET OUT OF IT, BUT THEY DIDN'T
GET EVERYTHING THEY WERE ASKING
FOR, ESPECIALLY NOT THE PORTS.
BUT I WANT TO GO BACK TO THE
QUESTION YOU ASKED WILL THE
CEASE FIRE HOLD.
I AGREE WITH DENNIS THAT THE
INCENTIVES FOR BOTH OF THEM TO
KEEP IT AND RESPECT IT IS VERY
HIGH.
THEY DON'T HAVE MUCH INCENTIVE
TO BREAK IT.
THEY HAVE VERY LITTLE TO ACHIEVE
IN THE SHORT TERM.
BUT HERE'S THE THING, I BELIEVE
FROM THE OUTSET NEITHER SIDE
WANTED THE ESCALATION AND THEY
ENDED UP WITH AN ESCALATION.
IT WAS VERY VOLATILE.
THERE WAS A LOT OF NEGOTIATIONS
AT STAKE COMING UP.
POLITICALLY, THERE ARE SOME
GAINS AND LOSSES.
THE PRIME MINISTER STARTED OFF
THE 82% APPROVAL RATING, THE
LATEST POLL IS 38% APPROVAL
RATING.
THERE'S A POLITICAL PROBLEM FOR
EACH ONE AND MUCH TO GAIN.
SO I DON'T THINK IT'S OVER, EVEN
THOUGH I THINK IT'S A DIFFERENT
STRATEGIC DECISION RIGHT NOW,
BOTH SIDES DON'T WANT TO
REENGAGE IN CONFLICT.
>> Brown: IS THE PALESTINIAN
AUTHORITY GOING WITH THIS?
HAS BENJAMIN NETANYAHU BEEN
WEAKENED?
>> I DON'T BELIEVE SO.
NETANYAHU IS MUCH MORE CAREFUL
IN TERMS OF HOW HE FRAMES THE
OBJECTIVES.
HIS OBJECTIVES WERE TO DESTROY
THE TUNNELS AND RESTORE QUIET.
THE THREAT OF HAMAS IS STILL
THERE, THE MILITARY WEAKENED BUT
THE THREAT IS STILL THERE, AND
FOR THOSE ON THE RIGHT HE'LL BE
CHALLENGED.
THE NUMBERS OF SUPPORT 82% WERE
UNREALISTIC AND WEREN'T
SUSTAINABLE ANYWAY, SO HE WILL
HAVE TO CONTEND WITH EXPLAINING
WHERE YOU GO FROM HERE, AND I
THINK SIMPLY HAVING THE STATUS
QUO ANTE IS SNO NOT SOMETHING
THAT WILL NECESSARILY BE
ACCEPTABLE.
I THINK HAMAS IS ALSO, IN THE
NEAR TERM, YOU KNOW, WITH THE
SENSE THEY STOOD UP IS ONE
THING, BUT AS THE DUST SETTLES,
I THINK THERE THERE BE WIL THERA
LOT OF QUESTIONS IN TERMS OF
WHERE TO GO FROM HERE, AND IN
TERMS OF AUTHORITY, THEY WANT TO
SHOW THEY'RE BACK IN GAZA.
HAMAS WILL WANT TO DEMONSTRATE
WHO'S IN CONTROL AND THAT'S AN
ISSUE FOR US TO WATCH.
>> Ifill: HOW DIFFERENT IS THE
ROLE EGYPT PLAYED THIS TIME
AROUND AND HOW DIFFERENT WAS THE
ROLE THE U.S. PLAYED?
>> OH, VERY DIFFERENT, BECAUSE I
THINK, OBVIOUSLY, IN SOME WAYS,
EGYPT IS ESSENTIAL, PARTLY
BECAUSE, OF COURSE, EGYPT HAS A
STAKE IN GAZA, IT'S RIGHT THERE
AND CARES ABOUT WHAT HAPPENS IN
GAZA FOR MULTIPLE REASONS -- A
FOR THE PALESTINIAN CAUSE BUT B
BECAUSE THEY SEE HAMAS AS THE
THREAT IN ALL EYES OF THE MUSLIM
BROTHERHOOD.
BUT WHAT MADE THEM MORE VALUABLE
THIS TIME FOR THE ISRAELIS WAS
THEY WERE CLOSER TO ISRAEL ON
HAMAS IN MANY WAYS.
THAT'S ONE REASON ISRAEL IS IN
SOME WAYS PREFERRED EGYPTIAN TO
AMERICAN MEDIATION, WHEREAS
ODDLY ENOUGH THE PALESTINIANS
ACTUALLY PREFERRED AMERICAN TO
EGYPTIAN MEDIATION.
THIS IS THE ODDITY OF ALL THIS.
>> Ifill: WE'RE GOING TO TALK
ABOUT THE U.S.'S ROLE IN THIS.
DID IT HELP TO STEP BACK FROM
THE TABLE A LITTLE BIT?
>> YES, I THINK IT DID BECAUSE,
AT THE END OF THE DAY, THE
EGYPTIANS HAD THE LEVERAGE.
SHIBLEY WAS RIGHT, YOU HAD A
CONVERSION BETWEEN EGYPT AND
ISRAEL.
EGYPT IN SOME WAYS WAS HARDER ON
HAMAS THAN THE ISRAELIS WERE.
THEY'RE THE ONES AND PROBABLY
THE DEAL IS THE REOPENING OF
RAFFA.
ONLY THEY COULD DO THAT.
>> Ifill: RIGHT, THE
CHECKPOINT IN EGYPT.
>> YES.
FROM AN AMERICAN STANDPOINT, WE
LOOKED AT EGYPT AND WONDERED ARE
THEY ACTIVE ENOUGH TO MAKE
SOMETHING HAPPEN?
AND THAT PROBABLY HAD US LOOK AT
TURKEY AND QATAR BUT IN A WAY
THAT WAS UNLIKELY TO PRODUCE THE
EGYPTIANS.
HELP, NUMBER ONE.
BUT NUMBER TWO, DIFFERENT IF
LAST TIME, THIS TIME THE
EGYPTIANS DIDN'T WANT IT TO
APPEAR AS IF THEY NEEDED THE
U.S. TO COME IN AND DO THIS AND
BECAUSE OF THAT I THINK WE WERE
STILL ACTIVE BUT AT A MUCH MORE
LOW VISIBILITY FASHION.
(INAUDIBLE) -- IF SO, WHAT IS IT
THOSE THINGS ARE LIKELY TO
HAPPEN?
>> THE REALITY IS WE CAN SAY
BOTH LOST AND POLITICAL
STALEMATE OR WHATEVER, BUT GAZA
WAS IN HORRIBLE SHAPE BEFORE THE
WAR STARTED.
BEFORE THE WAR, GUESS WHAT, NOT
ONLY DO WE HAVE .8% POPULATION
IN DEBT AND A QUARTER HOMELESS,
BUT THE DAMAGE TO PROPERTY IS
MANY TIMES ITS G.D.P. AND NO ONE
CAN DO THAT FROM THE INSIDE SO
EVEN TO GET BACK TO WHERE THEY
WERE WHICH IS HORRIBLE IIN
TO TAKE AN ENORMOUS AMOUNT,
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS, AND, TWO, I
THINK WHEN YOU LOOK AT IT NOBODY
REALLY CAN DO THIS OVER AND OVER
AGAIN.
THERE WAS A WAR IN 2008, 2009
THAT WAS DEVASTATING, THERE WAS
A WAR IN 2012 JUST TWO OR THREE
YEARS LATER.
THERE'S A WAR NOW, AND SOME
ISRAELIS ARE SAYING THIS IS NOT
FOR THE UNFINISHED BUSINESS, WE
NEED TO DO THIS AGAIN.
>> Ifill: HAS THIS EVOLVED
INTO A WAR OF ATTRITION THAT
THIS WAS IS ONLY WAY OUT?
>> YES, I THINK THAT HELPS TO
EXPLAIN WHY WE'RE SEEING THIS
END RIGHT NOW.
THE PRICE DID BECOME TOO HIGH
AND THE GAINS GREW INCREASINGLY
SUSPECT.
SO THAT PRODUCED A REALITY OF
WHERE WE ARE RIGHT NOW.
BUT I THINK IT WILL CREATE AN
INCENTIVE ON EACH SIDE NOT TO
SEE IT ON EACH EN
ONE ELEMENT OF THE
RECONSTRUCTION IS THE P.A. IS AT
THE BORDER CROSSING, THE
PALESTINIAN AUTHORITY, SO THEY
CAN BE IN A POSITION WHERE THEY
CAN TAKE SOME CREDIT FOR THIS,
BUT ALSO THE MORE YOU BEGIN TO
HAVE RECONSTRUCTION ASSUMING
THERE ARE SAFEGUARDS SO HAMAS
CAN'T MISUSE THE MATERIAL TO
REBUILD THE TUNNELS AND ROCKETS,
THE MORE IT WILL BE HARD TO GO
BACK TO CONFLICT BECAUSE TO
BEGIN TO RESTORE LIFE AGAIN IN
GAZA WILL CREATE A STRONG
INCENTIVE NOT TO PUT THAT AT
RISK.
>> IF I MAY SAY, THE GAZA WAR
WAS THE SYMPTOM NOT THE SOURCE
OF THE PROBLEM.
BEFORE WE WERE TALKING ABOUT THE
POSSIBILITY OF THE TWO STATES OF
ISRAEL COMING TO AN END,
COLLAPSE OF HOPE.
SO EVEN IF YOU FIX GAZA, MEANING
WHAT HAS HAPPENED, ALL THE
TRAGEDY THAT HAS HAPPENED,
THAT'S NOT GOING TO FIX IT AND I
THINK ONE THING THAT THEY WILL
DO HISTORICALLY IS CREATE
OPPORTUNITIES, RESHUFFLE THE
DECK.
IT CAN CUT BOTH WAYS.
PEOPLE CAN SAY I'M GOING TO
FIGHT AGAIN OR THEY CAN SAY THIS
IS NOT TENABLE.
THE DIPLOMATIC EFFORT SHOULD
FOCUS ON TURNING THIS INTO DOING
SOMETHING MORE COMPREHENSIVE.
>> Ifill: WE'LL BE WATCHING.
SHIBLEY TELHAMI, DENNIS ROSS,
THANK YOU BOTH VERY MUCH.
>> PLEASURE.
>> Ifill: NOW, WHEN IS AN
AMERICAN COMPANY NOT AN AMERICAN
COMPANY?
JEFFREY BROWN HAS OUR LOOK AT A
GROWING CONTROVERSY OVER
CORPORATE TAXES.
>> Brown: IN RECENT YEARS, A
NUMBER OF AMERICAN COMPANIES, AS
MANY AS 22 SINCE 2011, HAVE
'RELOCATED' OUTSIDE U.S.
BORDERS, USUALLY THROUGH MERGERS
WITH OR PURCHASES OF A FOREIGN
COMPANY.
ONE IMPACT OF CHANGING THEIR
BUSINESS ADDRESSES: THEY'RE NO
LONGER SUBJECT TO U.S. CORPORATE
TAXES.
IT'S A PROCESS COMMONLY KNOWN AS
A "TAX INVERSION."
AND BURGER KING APPEARS TO BE
THE LATEST EXAMPLE.
TODAY IT ANNOUNCED PLANS TO PAY
SOME $11 BILLION FOR THE
CANADIAN RESTAURANT CHAIN, TIM
HORTONS.
BURGER KING WILL EFFECTIVELY
BECOME A CANADIAN COMPANY FOR
TAX PURPOSES, THOUGH THE COMPANY
DENIES THAT WAS THE MOTIVE FOR
THE MOVE.
HERE TO TELL US ABOUT ALL THIS
IS ECONOMIST ROBERTON WILLIAMS,
SENIOR FELLOW AT THE NON-
PARTISAN "TAX POLICY CENTER,"
A JOINT VENTURE OF THE URBAN
INSTITUTE AND THE BROOKINGS
INSTITUTION.
AND WELCOME TO A TAX INVERSION.
MAYBE A PHRASE ONLY AN ECONOMIST
OU LIKE.
WHAT EXACTLY IS IT AND ARE WE
ACTUALLY SEEING MORE OF THEM?
>> AN INVERSION OCCURS WHEN AN
AMERICAN COMPANY MERGES WITH A
FOREIGN COMPANY AND BECOMES
FOREIGN COMPANY.
THAT'S THE IMPORTANT PART.
YOU HAVE TO BECOME A FOREIGN
ENTITY TO AVOID U.S. CORPORATE
TAXES.
>> Brown: ARE WE SEEING MORE
OF THEM?
>> WE, ARE FOR A COUPLE OF
REASONS.
PEOPLE ARE SEEING HIGH CORPORATE
TAX RATES AND TRYING TO AVOID
THAT.
SECONDLY, APPEARS CONGRESS IS
THINKING ABOUT WAY TO HAVE
STOPPING INVERSIONS.
PEOPLE ARE TRYING TO GET IN
AHEAD OF THAT KIND OF CHANGE,
MAKE THE INVERSION NOW SO YOU
CAN TAKE ADVANTAGE OF IT BEFORE
THE DOOR CLOSES.
>> Brown: I SEE, SO THEY'RE
TAKING PREEMPTIVE ACTION IN SOME
CASES.
AS I SAID, BURGER KING SAYS THIS
IS NOT WHY THEY DID IT.
WHAT DO COMPANIES SAY ABOUT THE
TAX STRUCTURE, ABOUT WHY THEY
MIGHT WANT TO BECOME FOREIGN
COMPANIES FOR TAX PURPOSES?
>> THEY'RE NOT GOING TO USE
TAXES AS AN EXCUSE FOR MERGING.
THAT DOESN'T SELL WELL TO THE
AMERICAN PUBLIC OR STOCKHOLDERS.
WHAT THEY SELL IT AS IS AN
ADVANTAGEOUS MELDING OF TWO
DIFFERENT KINDS OF ACTIVITIES.
IN THE CASE OF BURGER KING,
THEY'RE SAYING WE'RE GETTING THE
BREAKFAST ACTIVITIES OF TIM
HORTONS' PLANT.
SO THEY'RE PLING THINGS TOGETHER
AND MAKING A LARGER COMPANY TO
BRING BENEFIT TO STOCKHOLDERS.
THE TAX SAVINGS ARE JUST AN
ADDED BENEFIT, THEY SAY.
>> Brown: THEY SAY.
HOW DOES THE U.S. CORPORATE TAX
STRUCTURE COMPARE TO OTHERS?
I MEAN, WHAT IS THE ARGUMENT FOR
THAT KIND OF MOVE?
>> THE UNITED STATES TAXES
CORPORATIONS DIFFERENTLY THAN
MOST OTHER DEVELOPED COUNTRIES.
WE TAX CORPORATIONS BASED ON ALL
THE PROFITS THEY MAKE WORLDWIDE
AS OPPOSED TO THE PROFITS THEY
MAKE AT HOME.
MOST COUNTRIES ARE VIEWED AS A
TERRITORIAL SYSTEM.
YOU TAX ON THE BUSINESS THAT
GOES ON IN YOUR OWN COUNTRY.
THAT'S A VERY DIFFERENT THING.
FOR US, WE ALSO HAVE THE VERY
HIGHEST TAX RATE.
OUR TAX RATE IS IN EXCESS OF
35%, HIGHER THAN ANY OTHER
DEVELOPED COUNTRY IN THE WORLD.
WE HAVE A LOT OF TAX RATES THAT
BRING THE RATES DOWN -- WE HAVE
A LOT OF TAX BREAKS TO BRING THE
RATES DOWN AND YOU CAN TAKE
ADVANTAGE OF THE LOOPHOLES.
IF YOU EARN MONEY OVERSEAS, YOU
DON'T PAY TAXES UNTIL UNTIL YOU
BRING THE MONEYS HOME.
THERE'S ABOUT $2 TRILLION OF
AMERICAN COMPANIES' PROFITS
SITTING OVERSEES BECAUSE
COMPANIES DON'T WANT TO BRING
THEM HOME AND PAY AMERICANS
TAXONS THEM.
THEY'RE HOPING FOR A TAX
HOLIDAY, A LOWER OR ZERO RATE TO
BRING THE MONEYS HOME AND WHILE
THEY'RE WAITING FOR IT TO HAPPEN
THEY'RE DOING WHAT WOULD LOOK
LIKE AS SILLY THINGS.
FOR EXAMPLE, APPLE HAS BILLIONS
OF DOLLARS OF PROFIT SITTING
OVERSEAS YET THEY BORROWED
$30 BILLION AT HOME.
WHY BORROW THE MONEY AT HOME
WHILE YOU HAVE MONEY OVERSEAS?
TAXES.
AND YOU CAN DEDUCT THE INTEREST
YOU PAY AT HOME SO YOU'RE DOING
OKAY ON THE HOME TAXES.
>> Brown: SO FOR THE CRITICS
OF THE COMPANY AND MANY PEOPLE
LOOKING AT THIS JUST AS AN
EXAMPLE, IT LOOKS INEFFICIENT,
IT LOOKS UNPATRIOTIC, AS
UNPATRIOTIC CORPORATE CITIZENS.
>> THE PRESIDENT CERTAINLY LOOKS
AT IT THAT WAY AND A NUMBER OF
CONGRESSMEN SAY THIS IS NOT
FAIR.
ON THE OTHER HAND, THERE'S
NOTHING WRONG WITH TRYING TO
MINIMIZE YOUR TAX BILL.
YOU AND I DO IT, I HOPE.
>> Brown: BUT YOU MENTIONED
THE PRESIDENT.
HE SAID HE SORT OF CALLED OUT
THE COMPANIES.
HE ALSO, THOUGH, SAID HE DIDN'T
KNOW HOW MUCH AUTHORITY, IF HE
HAD THAT MUCH AUTHORITY TO TAKE
ACTION.
WHERE DOES THAT STAND IN TERMS
OF WHAT THE PRESIDENT OR
CONGRESS MIGHT DO?
>> THE TREASURY IS LOOKING TO
SEE IF THERE ARE WAYS THEY CAN
CLOSE DOWN SOME OF THE BENEFITS
FOR INVERTING.
ONE OF THE THINGS COMPANIES THAT
INVERT DO IS LOAN MONEY FROM THE
FOREIGN COMPANY TO THE AMERICAN
PART OF THE COMPANY.
THE AMERICANS PAY INTEREST TO
THE FOREIGN PART OF THE COMPANY,
THAT INTEREST IS DEDUCTIBLE
AGAINST THE AMERICAN PROFITS AND
REDUCES TAXES PAID BY THE
CORPORATION IN THE UNITED
STATES, AND THE INTEREST IS NOT
TAXABLE IN OTHER COUNTRIES.
SO IT'S A WIN-WIN SITUATION ON
THE TAX SIDE.
IT'S A WAY OF NOT ONLY GETTING
OUT FROM UNDER THE CORPORATE TAX
FOR YOUR MONEYS EARNED OUTSIDE
THE UNITED STATES BUT MINIMIZING
THE TAX YOU PAY ON PROFITS MADE
INSIDE THE UNITED STATES.
>> Brown: I KNOW YOU'RE NOT A
POLITICAL SCIENTIST BUT YOU
WATCH.
THIS WHERE DO YOU SEE THE KIND
OF SENTIMENT AND POLITICS THAT
CALLS FOR CHANGE?
I MEAN, EVEN TODAY WITH BURGER
KING, WHO IS A VERY PROMINENT
COMPANY, RIGHT, WITH A NAME
BRAND, CALLS FOR BOYCOTTS.
SO HOW MUCH PUBLIC SENTIMENT DO
YOU SEE THAT MIGHT BE PUSHING
THE PRESIDENT AND CONGRESS TO
TAKE ACTION TO STOP THESE KINDS
OF MOVES?
>> I DON'T KNOW HOW FAR THAT
WILL GO, PEOPLE WILL CALL FOR
THE BOYCOTTS, AND WHETHER THEY
ACTUALLY GIVE UP THEIR BURGER
KING HAMBURGERS OR TIM HORTONS
DONUTS IN THE MORNING, I DON'T
KNOW.
WHAT I KNOW IS WE NEED THE
REVENUES, WE'RE RUNNING LARGE
DETVER
THINGS USING UP THE REVENUES ARE
THINGS NOT GOOD FOR THE U.S.
TREASURY.
THE TREASURY WILL LOOK FOR AS
MANY WAYS AS THEY CAN TO STOP
IT.
WHETHER THEY'RE SUCCESSFUL OR
CONGRESS STEPS IN IS ANOTHER
QUESTION.
>> Brown: ROBERTON WILLIAMS,
THANKS VERY MUCH.
>> YOU'RE WELCOME.
>> Ifill: NOW, WE CONTINUE THIS
WEEK'S SERIES: "RETHINKING
COLLEGE."
AS STATES CUT FUNDING FOR PUBLIC
INSTITUTIONS, STUDENTS ARE
TAKING ON BIGGER DEBT TO PAY FOR
THEIR EDUCATION.
MORE THAN 70% OF LAST YEAR'S
COLLEGE GRADUATES HAD STUDENT
LOANS, AVERAGING ALMOST $30,000
EACH.
HARI SREENIVASAN HAS OUR REPORT.
>> Sreenivasan: IT WAS A GREAT
DAY FOR ANN DEGARMO, WHO JOINED
6,400 STUDENTS FOR GRADUATION AT
THE UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN IN
MADISON LAST MAY.
THE MILESTONE MARKED THE
BEGINNING OF HER LIFE AFTER
COLLEGE.
>> OH MY GOD, OH MY GOD, IT'S
HAPPENING, IT'S HAPPENING.
>> Sreenivasan: IT ALSO MARKED
THE BEGINNING OF PAYMENTS ON
$58,000 OF STUDENT LOANS.
THE HEAVY DEBT LOAD CARRIED BY
STUDENTS LIKE ANN DEGARMO HAS
SPARKED A NATIONAL DIALOGUE
AMONG POLICY MAKERS.
AND IT'S EASY TO SEE WHY.
SEVEN OF TEN GRADUATING STUDENTS
LEFT COLLEGE LAST YEAR IN DEBT.
THE AVERAGE DEBT LOAD IS
$26,000.
ONE IN TEN OWES MORE THAN
$40,000.
BEHIND HOME MORTGAGES, STUDENT
LOANS ARE THE SECOND LARGEST
SOURCE OF PERSONAL DEBT, MORE
THAN CREDIT CARDS, MORE THAN
AUTO LOANS.
THE TOTAL BILL DUE FOR STUDENTS
IN AMERICA TOPS ONE TRILLION
DOLLARS.
THROUGHOUT COLLEGE, ANN DEGARMO
HELD A JOB.
EVEN SO, SHE TOOK ON PRIVATE AND
FEDERAL LOANS TO MAKE ENDS MEET.
>> I COULDN'T WORK ENOUGH HOURS
WITH GOING TO SCHOOL FULL TIME
AND BE ABLE TO AFFORD TO PAY MY
RENT IN FULL.
>> Sreenivasan: NOW, THE REALITY
OF PAYING DOWN DEBT FOR YEARS
HAS HER WORRIED.
>> IT'S HARD, IT'S REALLY HARD,
AND IT'S REALLY SCARY.
>> Sreenivasan: WHY ARE YOU
SCARED?
>> THIS EDUCATION IS GOING TO
COST ME, YOU KNOW, A CAR, A
HOUSE POTENTIALLY.
$58,000 ISN'T CHANGE, IT'S
DEFINITELY NOT POCKET CHANGE,
IT'S GOING TO COST ME THE
ABILITY TO START A FAMILY WHEN I
WANT TO, POTENTIALLY, DEPENDING
HOW FAST I CAN PAY IT BACK.
>> Sreenivasan: DEGARMO BROUGHT
HER CONCERNS TO A TOWN HALL
MEETING IN MADISON.
THE GATHERING WAS ORGANIZED BY
AN ADVOCACY GROUP CALLED ONE
WISCONSIN NOW.
SCOTT ROSS IS THE GROUP'S
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR.
>> WE'VE TRAVELED AROUND
WISCONSIN, AND WE'VE TALKED TO
PEOPLE OF ALL AGES ABOUT THEIR
STUDENT LOAN DEBT, AND IT'S SOUL
CRUSHING FOR THEM, THEY'RE
SAYING ALL I WANT TO DO IS GO TO
COLLEGE, AND NOW I'VE GOT A 25
YEAR OBLIGATION
>> Sreenivasan: STUDENT SAUL
NEWTON, FROM NORTHERN WISCONSIN,
DESCRIBED THE DIFFICULT TIME HE
HAD AFFORDING COLLEGE.
>> OVER THE COURSE OF TWO YEARS
I SAW MY TUITION SKYROCKET, I
WAS WORKING MULTIPLE JOBS TRYING
TO KEEP MY HEAD ABOVE WATER, BUT
I WAS DROWNING.
>> Sreenivasan: NEWTON SAYS HE
JOINED THE ARMY TO AVOID SERIOUS
DEBT, AND WAS QUICKLY DEPLOYED
TO AFGHANISTAN DURING THE
MILITARY SURGE IN 2007.
>> I'M GRATEFUL THAT NOW I
QUALIFY FOR THE GI BILL AND I
CAN GO TO COLLEGE, AND I HAVE
THAT OPPORTUNITY, BUT I THINK
IT'S VERY INDICATIVE OF THE
TYPES OF CHOICES THAT STUDENTS
HAVE TO MAKE NOW, THAT I HAD TO
MAKE THE CHOICE TO GO TO WAR IN
ORDER TO AFFORD A COLLEGE
EDUCATION.
>> Sreenivasan: CONGRESSMAN MARK
POCAN, A DEMOCRAT WHO REPRESENTS
WISCONSIN'S SECOND DISTRICT,
BELIEVES STUDENT DEBT IS
CREATING A DRAG ON THE COUNTRY'S
ECONOMIC RECOVERY.
>> COMING OUT OF SCHOOL YOU'RE
PAYING A LOT OF LOANS, IF YOU'RE
NOT BUYING A NEW CAR, YOU'RE NOT
STIMULATING THE ECONOMY.
INSTEAD OF BUYING A HOME, YOU
MIGHT RENT.
SO SOME OF THE THINGS THAT
REALLY HELP US AT THE MOST BASE
LEVEL OF TRYING TO BRING THE
ECONOMY UP AND GET IT GOING
WHILE WE'RE STILL RECOVERING
FROM THE RECESSION IS HELD BACK
EVEN FURTHER BY PEOPLE HAVING
HIGH LEVELS OF DEBT.
>> Sreenivasan: SO WHAT'S
CAUSING THE PROBLEM?
>> WITH THE CRASH OF THE ENTIRE
ECONOMY JUST A FEW YEARS AGO, WE
REALLY HAVEN'T SEEN STATES PUT
MONEY BACK INTO THE PUBLIC
INSTITUTIONS, SO WHILE YOU STILL
HAVE THE COST OF EDUCATION, IF
IT'S NOT BEING COVERED AS IT
TRADITIONALLY WAS, OFTEN BY THE
STATES, IT'S GONE AND GOT PASSED
ON TO STUDENTS OVER AND OVER.
>> Sreenivasan: IN FACT, TUITION
AT PUBLIC INSTITUTIONS HAS RISEN
MORE THAN 50% OVER THE LAST
DECADE.
RGRADUATES INICANT NUMBER GIVEN
THE UNITED STATES ATTEND PUBLIC
INSTITUTIONS.
RECENTLY WISCONSIN'S GOVERNOR
SCOTT WALKER WEIGHED IN ON THE
RISING COSTS OF HIGHER
EDUCATION.
IN ANNOUNCING HIS RE-ELECTION
CAMPAIGN, WALKER PROMISED TO
EXTEND A TWO-YEAR TUITION FREEZE
AT THE UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN.
>> MORE STUDENTS AND MORE
WORKING FAMILIES CAN AFFORD TO
GET A GREAT EDUCATION AT ONE OF
OUR MANY U.W. CAMPUSES ALL
ACROSS THE STATE, HOW ABOUT
THAT?
>> Sreenivasan: ROSS WELCOMES
ANY ATTENTION TO HIGH COLLEGE
COSTS AND HEAVY DEBT AS AN
ELECTION YEAR ISSUE.
>> THERE ARE FORTY MILLION
STUDENT LOAN DEBTORS OUT THERE,
THEY NEED TO GET ORGANIZED, YOU
KNOW.
IF YOU THINK ABOUT THE AMOUNT OF
TIME AND DISCUSSION AND DEBATE,
AND FEAR THAT ELECTED OFFICIALS
HAVE TO SAY DOING SOMETHING WITH
SOCIAL SECURITY, WELL THERE'S
SIXTY FIVE MILLION PEOPLE WHO
GET SOCIAL SECURITY, NOW WE'VE
GOT FORTY MILLION PEOPLE WITH
STUDENT LOAN DEBT, THAT'S FORTY
MILLION PEOPLE WHO, IF THEY GET
INVOLVED IN THE PUBLIC POLICY
DEBATE, IF THEY GET ORGANIZED,
THEY'RE GOING TO BE A VOTING
BLOCK THAT PEOPLE WILL FEAR TO
NOT ACT.
>> Sreenivasan: THIS SPRING, A
FLURRY OF BILLS WERE INTRODUCED
BY DEMOCRATS IN WISCONSIN AND
WASHINGTON TO LOWER THE EXISTING
DEBT BURDEN, SO FAR WITH LITTLE
SUCCESS.
ONE BILL, PROPOSED BY
CONGRESSMAN POCAN WOULD ALLOW
FOR REFINANCING OF STUDENT LOANS
AT LOWER INTEREST RATES.
>> IN ANYTHING ELSE IN THE
WORLD, IF YOU'RE A SMALL
BUSINESS, IF YOU OWN A HOME, YOU
HAVE A CAR, YOU'RE A STATE OR
LOCAL UNIT OF GOVERNMENT,
EVERYONE'S REFINANCING LOANS
BECAUSE WE'RE AT HISTORIC LOWS,
AND YET WITH STUDENT LOANS IT'S
REALLY NOT ALLOWED.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT ABOUT THE
FOLKS THAT SAY, WELL, WHERE'S
PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY, THIS IS
THE COST OF GOING TO SCHOOL?
>> I THINK THE DIFFERENCE IS,
YOU KNOW, WHEN I WENT TO SCHOOL,
I COULD PAY IT OFF IN FIVE
YEARS.
NOW, THESE ARE PEOPLE LEAVING
WITH $26,000, $58,000, AND NOT
DOING IT IN FIVE YEARS, BUT
DOING IT IN TEN, 20 YEARS.
>> IT'S DIFFICULT TO KIND OF
UNDERSTAND AS AN 18-OR-19-YEAR-
OLD THAT, YOU KNOW, THIS
EDUCATION THAT YOU WANT, AND
YOU'RE EXPECTED TO GET, AT THIS
POINT IN ORDER TO GET A GOOD
JOB, IS GOING TO COST SO MUCH
MONEY.
IT IS STILL TRUE THAT TO GET THE
"GOOD JOB," A COLLEGE DEGREE IS
WORTH THE MONEY.
>> Sreenivasan: ACCORDING TO THE
FEDERAL RESERVE, A BACHELOR'S
DEGREE PROVIDES A 75% WAGE
ADVANTAGE OVER A HIGH SCHOOL
DIPLOMA.
DESPITE THE HIGH COST, SOME
STUDIES SAY THE RATE OF
BORROWING HAS REMAINED STEADY,
AND THE VAST MAJORITY OF
GRADUATES ARE PLEASED WITH THEIR
EDUCATION.
>> THE COLLEGE EXPERIENCE IS
GREAT, I'VE HAD A LOVELY, A
WONDERFUL TIME IN COLLEGE, BUT
IT'S CHALLENGING, AND IT'S
SOMETIMES VERY EXHAUSTING, BUT I
THINK IN THE LONG RUN IT'S WORTH
IT, IT'S WORTH IT.
>> Sreenivasan: DEGARMO IS
LIKELY TO GET SOME RELIEF ON HER
FEDERAL STUDENT LOANS FROM THE
PRESIDENT'S ETIS
SUMMER WHICH CAPS PAYMENTS TO
10% OF MONTHLY EARNINGS.
>> Ifill: TOMORROW, HARI LOOKS
AT THE IMPACT THAT MASSIVE OPEN
ONLINE COURSES, CALLED MOOCS,
ARE HAVING ON TRADITIONAL
TEACHING AT THE UNIVERSITY
LEVEL.
AND ONLINE, YOU CAN READ ABOUT
HOW NEW HAMPSHIRE IS
EXPERIMENTING WITH A TUITION
FREEZE AT ITS PUBLIC COLLEGES TO
KEEP IT'S STUDENTS
IN-STATE.
PLUS, JOIN US ALL WEEK FOR
NEWSHOUR TWITTER CHATS,
TOMORROW'S TOPIC: WHAT GIVES A
COLLEGE DEGREE ITS VALUE?
>> Ifill: WE RETURN NOW TO IRAQ,
AND THE PROSPECTS FOR UNITY IN A
GREATLY FRACTURED COUNTRY.
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION HAS
REPEATEDLY STATED THAT IT WILL
PROVIDE ADDITIONAL MILITARY
SUPPORT AGAINST THE "ISLAMIC
STATE" GROUP ONLY WHEN IRAQIS
FORM AN INCLUSIVE GOVERNMENT
THAT CAN DELIVER NATIONAL UNITY.
HOWEVER, AS CHIEF FOREIGN
AFFAIRS CORRESPONDENT MARGARET
WARNER REPORTS TONIGHT FROM
NORTHERN IRAQ, DISAFFECTED
SUNNIS AND KURDS ARE SAYING THEY
DON'T HAVE MUCH HOPE IN THE
POLITICS EMANATING FROM BAGHDAD.
>> Warner: KURDISH PESHMERGA
SOLDIERS GREETED THE MAYOR OF
THE LONG-CONTESTED CITY OF
KIRKUK SUNDAY AS HE TOURED A
TRENCH BUILT TO STOP
INFILTRATION FROM THE SOUTH OF
THE CITY.
HOW MANY OF THESE OBSERVATION
POSTS ARE THERE?
>> WE'VE BUILT 32 OF THESE AND
THERE ARE ANOTHER 28 WE'RE
BUILDING."
>> Warner: THE IRAQI MILITARY
HELPED PROTECT THE CITY TOO, IT
FLED THE SO-CALLED "ISLAMIC
STATE'S" ADVANCE IN MID-JUNE.
ARMED FORCES FROM THE SEMI-
AUTONOMOUS KURDISH REGIONAL
GOVERNMENT TOOK OVER.
THE TRENCH AROUND THE CITY
FUNNELS ALL WHO SEEK TO ENTER
THROUGH CLAWED CHECKPOINTS AND
MANY OUTSIDERS ARE TURNED AWAY.
IT'S A METAPHOR FOR THE MUTUAL
DISTRUST THAT INFLICTS THE
COUNTRY AMONG THE SHIITES,
SUNNIS AND THE KURDS.
NOW THAT THE MILITANTS CAPTURED
ONE-THIRD OF IRAQ, THE PRESSURE
IS ON ENCOURAGED BY THE U.S.
WITH THE THREE FASHIONS TO
RECONCILE IN THE CAPITOL.
12 DAYS AGO SHIITE PRIME
MINISTER NOURI AL-MALIKI AGREED
TO STEP ASIDE AFTER EIGHT YEARS.
ANOTHER SHIITE FIGURE al-ABADI
FACES A SEPTEMBER 10 DEADLINE TO
FORM A NEW GOVERNMENT WITH BUY
INN FROM DISAFFECTED SUNNIS AND
KURDS.
>> YOU HAVE TWO CONSTITUENCIES
IN THE COUNTRY WHO FEEL
ALIENATED.
>> Reporter: MICHAEL
STEPHENSON SAYS BEFORE
COOPERATING BOTH GROUPS HAVE
DEMANDS.
ABOVE ALL GUARANTEES THAT
MALIKI'S HEAVY HANDED
SHIITE-DOMINATED RULE WON'T BE
REPEATED.
>> THERE'S A NUMBER OF PROBLEMS
HERE ON BOTH SIDES TO DO
DISTRIBUTION OF RESOURCES AND
ALMOST A SHOW OF RESPECT FROM
THE STATE.
>> Reporter: PART OF THAT
RESPECT BUBBLES UP FROM BENEATH,
IRAQ'S OIL WELL, THE WORLD'S
7th LARGEST PRODUCER DRAWING
FOREIGN COMPANIES WITH
TECHNOLOGY AND MANAGEMENT SKILLS
TO PRODUCE HERE.
BUT THE MALIKI GOVERNMENT HAS
SHORTCHANGED THE KURD AND SUNNI
REGIONS IN REDISTRIBUTING THE
REVENUES.
YET ORDINARY IRAQIS SEEM MOST
CONCERN WITH SHARING THE OIL.
THOSE WE MET SAID WHAT THEY
REALLY WANT IS A PEACEFUL
COUNTRY IN WHICH TO LIVE THEIR
LIVES.
THIS WOMAN FLED MOSUL WITH HER
FAMILY WHEN EXTREMISTS TOOK OVER
IN JUNE.
WE MET HER IN A SHOPPING MALL.
>> WE HOPE THINGS GET BETTER, WE
ASK ONLY FOR PEACE AND SECURITY.
>> Warner: BAGHDAD LAWYER AQIL
AL HAYALI SAID RAMPANT SECTARIAN
VIOLENCE HAD FORCED HIM AND HIS
WIFE FROM BAGHDAD.
>> ( translated ): THERE IS A
20% POSSIBILITY I WILL GO BACK
BUT THINGS HAVE TO GET BETTER, I
THANK GOD WE DON'T HAVE KIDS
RIGHT NOW.
>> Warner: BUT CAN THE POLITICAL
SYSTEM DELIVER ON
RECONCILIATION, AND IN THE FACE
OF THE I.S THREAT?
FOR ANSWERS, WE WENT TO TWO
MAJOR FIGURES, ONE FROM EACH
ALIENATED CAMP: KIRKUK GOVERNOR
KARIM, A KURD, AND SUNNI ARAB
ALI HATEM AL-SULEIMAN, LEADER OF
IRAQ'S LARGEST TRIBE, WHOSE
FIGHTERS IN 2006-2008 HELPED
U.S. FORCES TURN THE TIDE
AGAINST AL QAEDA IN IRAQ.
GOVERNOR KARIM WON THE ELECTION
THREE YEARS AGO WITH A HUGE
MAJORITY DRAWN FROM ALL HIS
CITY'S SECTARIAN AND ETHNIC
COMMUNITIES, KURDS, SUNNI ARABS,
TURKOMEN, CHRISTIANS AND
SHIITES.
ON A HEAVILY-GUARDED TOUR OF THE
CITY PROJECTS UNDER
CONSTRUCTION, HE MAINTAINED HE
EXTREMISTS' ADVANCE HAS BROUGHT
THE CITY'S OFTEN DIVIDED GROUPS
TOGETHER.
>> ACTUALLY, BELIEVE IT OR NOT,
IT HAS STRENGTHENED THE
RELATIONSHIP.
THEY FEEL CLOSER TO ME, THEY
COME TO ME FOR THEIR CONCERNS
AND THEIR NEEDS MORE THAN
ACTUALLY BEFORE.
>> Warner: KADIM'S SOUGHT BUY-IN
FROM ALL HIS CONSTITUENTS,
DELIVERING SERVICES AND
GOVERNING INCLUSIVELY IN
CONTRAST TO THE ZERO-SUM
POLITICS IN BAGHDAD.
TURKOMAN SHOP-OWNER ARKAN ESAM
APPEARED TO CONFIRM THAT.
>> ( translated ): WE LIKE THIS
GOVERNOR.
WHY?
BECAUSE HE IS SERVING THE CITY
AND DOESN'T DIFFERENTIATE
BETWEEN THE ETHNICITY'S.
>> Warner: BUT IRAQ'S LONG-
RUNNING SECTARIAN WARFARE AMONG
SUNNIS, SHIITES AND KURDS, NEWLY
FUELED BY THE EXTREMIST'S
ADVANCE, STILL IMPINGES.
WE MET WITH HIM THE MORNING
AFTER THREE DEADLY BOMBINGS TORE
THROUGH HIS CITY.
>> PRESIDENT OBAMA HAD BEEN
RELUCTANT TO GET ENGAGED MORE
MILITARILY IN IRAQ UNTIL IT'S
WARRING FACTIONS AGREE TO WORK
TOGETHER.
THE WEEKEND SUICIDE BOMBINGS
HERE IN KIRKUK AND A CLUSTER OF
OTHER ATTACKS IN BAGHDAD, DIYALA
PROVINCE AND ERBIL, SUGGEST THAT
RECONCILIATION REMAINS VERY
DIFFICULT TO ACHIEVE.
KARIM BELIEVES THERE'S ONLY ONE
PATH TO THAT: DECENTRALIZING THE
GOVERNMENT AND EMPOWERING THE
COUNTRY'S THREE REGIONS.
IF NOT, HE FORECASTS, THERE WILL
BE A MESSY BREAKUP ANYWAY.
>> THE COMMON GOAL IS TO BUILD A
COUNTRY THAT'S TRULY DEMOCRATIC,
THAT'S INCLUSIVE AND THAT IS
DECENTRALIZED TO THE MAXIMUM
EXTENT THAT YOU CAN DO IT.
>> Warner: AND IF THAT'S NOT
POSSIBLE?
>> IF THAT'S NOT POSSIBLE I
THINK IRAQ IS GONE AS WE KNOW
IT.
>> Warner: AND WHAT ABOUT THE
KURDISH REGION?
>> THE KURDISH REGION WILL HAVE
EVERY RIGHT IF THAT DOESN'T
HAPPEN TO GO IT'S OWN WAY AND
DETERMINE ITS FUTURE.
>> Warner: AND KIRKUK IS PART OF
THAT?
>> KIRKUK IS ALWAYS PART OF
KURDISTAN.
>> ( translated ): WE DON'T WANT
TO SPLIT FROM IRAQ BUT WE WANT
TO HAVE OUR OWN REGION, OUR OWN
ECONOMY, OUR OWN SECURITY.
WE NEVER WANTED TO SPLIT FROM
IRAQ BUT RATHER STRENGTHEN
IRAQ'S UNITY.
>> Warner: WE MET SHEIKH ALI
HATEM IN ERBIL, FAR FROM HIS
ANCESTRAL HOME OF ANBAR PROVINCE
HE SOUGHT REFUGE HERE A MONTH
AGO AFTER BAGHDAD ISSUED AN
ARREST WARRANT AGAINST HIM FOR
TREASON IN THE WAKE OF THE
CONFLICT BETWEEN MALIKI'S FORCES
AND SUNNI DEMONSTRATORS IN
ANBAR.
HE SHARES GOV. KARIM'S VIEW,
THAT THE RECONCILIATION TALKS IN
BAGHDAD WILL GO NOWHERE IF THE
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT DOESN'T
LOOSEN ITS GRIP.
>> Warner: HOW HOPEFUL ARE YOU
THAT THIS KIND OF INCLUSIVE
GOVERNMENT CAN BE FORMED?
>> ( transla ): VERY
DIFFICULT.
IF WE WANT TO PROTECT IRAQ, IF
WE WANT TO PROTECT THE RIGHT OF
THE IRAQI PEOPLE WE SHOULD GO
THE SOLUTION OF THREE DIFFERENT
REGIONS OR THE DEMOCRATIC,
FEDERAL IRAQ RATHER THAN A
UNITED IRAQ BUILT OVER THE BLOOD
OF THE IRAQI PEOPLE.
>> Warner: IF THAT DOES COME TO
PASS, AL HATEM SAYS, THEN HIS
DULEIM TRIBE AND OTHERS ARE
READY TO TAKE UP ARMS AGAINST
THE ISLAMIC STATE FORCES, IF
>> ( translated ): I.S.I.S. ARE
NOT MUSLIMS, THEY ARE ISLAMISTS.
ISLAM DOESN'T CALL FOR A COUNTRY
WE HAVE POSTPONED THE BATTLE
AGAINST ISIS ONLY BECAUSE OF THE
POLITICAL SITUATION.
OTHERWISE, WE ARE GOING TO FACE
THEM.
>> Warner: EVE T
WOULD IT BE ENOUGH?
>> THE IDEA THAT POLITICAL
AGREEMENT I BAGHDAD WILL
IMMEDIATELY SOLVE ALL THE
PROBLEMS WITH SUNNI DISAFFECTION
AND TRIBAL DISAFFECTION IS A BIT
NAIVE.
BUT IT JUST OPENS THAT DOOR.
>> Warner: FOR A COUNTRY THAT
SEES NO EXIT, EVEN AN OPEN DOOR
OFFERS HOPE.
>> Ifill: I SPOKE WITH MARGARET
A SHORT TIME AGO.
THANKS FOR JOINING US AGAIN.
WE JUST HEARD IN YOUR PIECE A
KURDISH LEADER SAID A
DECENTRALIZED IRAQ IS POSSIBLE.
IS BAGHDAD CRAZY ABOUT THAT
IDEA?
>> I HAVEN'T BEEN IN BAGHDAD ON
THIS TRIP, BUT I WOULD SAY THAT
THE SHIITES CERTAINLY AREN'T
GOING TO LIKE THAT IDEA.
AFTER ALL, THEY ARE THE MAJORITY
IN THIS COUNTRY, THEY'RE BOUND
TO KEEP WINNING FUTURE ELECTIONS
AND THAT MEANS FOR THE
FORESEEABLE FUTURE THEY'LL
ALWAYS GET TO HAVE ASITE PRIME
MINISTER AND MALIKI'S MADE THAT
A HUGELY IMPORTANT POST.
THING ON THING THAT MIGHT CHANGE
THEIR MIND TO BE WILLING TO
COMPROMISE IS THEY NEED THE
OTHER TWO GROUPS TO FIGHT THE
THREAT FROM THE EXTREMIST FORCES
BUT THAT'S ONLY IF THE KURDS AND
SUNNIS INSIST ON IT AS A PRICE
FOR GETTING INTO THE GOVERNMENT.
THE KURDS WHO HAVE THE
SEMIAUTONOMOUS REGION ALREADY UP
HERE ARE, OF COURSE, IN FAVOR OF
IT, IF IT MEANS GETTING A BIGGER
SLICE OF THE OIL REVENUES.
I THINK THE SUNNI POLITICAL
CLASS IS A LITTLE LESS CLEAR
BECAUSE YOU DO HAVE SUNNI
POLITICIANS IN BAGHDAD WHO ARE
INVESTED IN THE IDEA OF A STRONG
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT, THEY JUST
WANT A BIGGER SLICE OF IT.
THE CRITICS SAY, LIKE THAT
SHEIKH WE INTERVIEWED, THAT'S
BECAUSE THEY WANT TO SHARE IN
THE SPOILS.
THE QUESTION I KEEP GETTING
ASKED HERE, GWEN, IS WHERE IS
THE UNITED STATES GOING TO COME
DOWN ON THIS?
A LOT OF PEOPLE HERE, AND ALSO
FARTHER SOUTH INTO IRAQ PROPER,
HAVE SAID, YOU KNOW, THE
AMERICANS' INSISTENCE OVER THE
LAST TEN YEARS UNDER PRESIDENTS
GEORGE W. BUSH AND OBAMA ON A
UNIFIED IRAQ IS UNREALISTIC
BECAUSE THE POLITICS PRACTICED
HERE ARE SECTARIAN, WINNER TAKES
ALL AND ALWAYS ALIENATES THE
OTHER TWO GROUPS.
>> Ifill: DOES IRAN HAVE A
ROLE IN THE DIRECTION THIS GOES?
>> OH, ABSOLUTELY, THEY'VE HAD A
ROLE HERE ALL ALONG EVEN ALL
DURING THE AMERICAN OCCUPATION,
AS A MATTER OF FACT, BUT THE
LATEST SIGN OF THAT WAS THAT,
TODAY, SURPRISINGLY, THE IRANIAN
FOREIGN MINISTER SHOWED UP IN
ERBIL, MET WITH THE PRESIDENT
AND PRIME MINISTER, HAD A PRESS
CONFERENCE AND THE PRESIDENT OF
THIS REGION ANNOUNCED IRAN HAS
BEEN SUPPLYING THE KURDS WITH
WEAPONS TO FIGHT THE I.S.
FORCES.
NOW THAT'S A REAL TURNAROUND
BECAUSE THE IRANIANS HAD THEIR
OWN KURDISH PROBLEM AS THEY SEE
IT.
THEY'VE NEVER BEEN FRIENDLY TO
THIS SEMI-SOVEREIGN KURDISH
ENTITY UP HERE, BUT I GUESS IT'S
THE I.S. THREAT IMPEELING THEM
IN THAT DIRECTION AND BEER ZANNY
SAID, YOU KNOW, WE ASKED A LOT
OF COUNTRIES FOR HELP AND
WEAPONS AND IRAN WAS FIRST
COUNTRY TO RESPOND.
SO I THINK IT IS EVIDENCE, GWEN,
IN THIS SORT OF SLOW MOTION
DISSOLUTION OF IRAQ WE HAVE BEEN
SEEING OVER THE LAST FEW YEARS
EXACERBATED BY THE I.S. FORCES
NOW, NOT ONLY IRAN, BUT PERHAPS
SOME OF IRAQ'S OTHER NEIGHBORS
ARE GOING TO WANT TO PLAY.
>> Ifill: KEEPING AN EYE ON
IRAN AND THE U.S., MARGARET
WARNER FOR US IN IRAQ TONIGHT,
THANK YOU.
>> PLEASURE, GWEN.
>> Ifill: WE TURN NOW TO OUR
OCCASIONAL SERIES OF
CONVERSATIONS WITH THOSE
DIRECTLY AFFECTED BY THE ONGOING
BORDER CRISIS.
JEFF IS BACK WITH THAT.
>> Brown: LAST NIGHT WE HEARD
FROM AN ATTORNEY OFFERING FREE
LEGAL SERVICES TO IMMIGRANTS AT
A NEW MEXICO DETENTION CENTER.
TONIGHT, RANCHER AND
VETERINARIAN GARY THRASHER JOINS
US.
HE'S LIVED ON THE SOUTHERN U.S.
BORDER FOR MORE THAN FOUR
DECADES.
HE HAS A RANCH NEAR SIERRA
VISTA, ARIZONA, JUST 8 MILES
FROM THE MEXICAN BORDER.
AND HE TREATS CATTLE IN RANCHES
FROM ARIZONA TO NEW MEXICO TO
WEST TEXAS, WHERE RUGGED, REMOTE
LANDSCAPE IS A MAJOR CORRIDOR
FOR ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS AND DRUG
SMUGGLERS.
WELCOME TO YOU, DR. THRASHER.
SO HOW DOES ILLEGAL IMMIGRATION
AT THE BORDER IMPACT YOUR LIFE
AS A RANCHER AND VET?
GIVE US A GLIMPSE OF LIFE AT THE
BORDER AS YOU EXPERIENCE IT.
>> WELL, WHERE I'M AT, AT THE
BORDER, AND WHERE I SPEND MOST
OF MY TIME IS IN THE REMOTE
REGIONS OF THE BORDER RATHER THE
AREAS WHERE THERE'S A LOT OF
POPULATION, SO WE'RE IN PRETTY
REMOTE AREAS THAT HAVE A LOT OF
TRAFFIC, THAT ARE NOT PATROLLED
VERY REGULARLY, AND IT DOES
CREATE A SITUATION WHERE WE COME
IN CONTACT WITH QUITE A FEW
PEOPLE COMING ACROSS THE BORDER
FOR ALL KINDS OF DIFFERENT
REASONS.
RIGHT NOW, IT'S A LOT OF DRUGS,
A LOT OF OTHER THAN MEXICAN TYPE
SMUGGLING.
MOSTLY SMUGGLING RATHER THAN
JUST IMMIGRANT ACTIVITIES.
IN THE PAST IT'S A HUGE AMOUNT
OF IMMIGRANTS AND NOW IT'S DRUGS
AND OTMs, THEY CALL THEM.
>> Brown: HAVE YOU SEEN
CHANGES IN THE RECENT YEARS
EITHER IN VOLUME OR TYPES OF
ACTIVITIES?
>> OH, YEAH, THERE'S CHANGE
DEPENDING ON THE REGIONS OF THE
BORDER.
I TRAVEL THE WHOLE BORDER OF
NEW MEXICO AND ARIZONA PRIMARILY
AND DIFFERENT REGIONS HAVE
DIFFERENT TYPES OF TRAFFIC
DEPENDING ON THE GANGS RUNNING
THE PARTICULAR ROUTES THROUGH
THERE.
WE ARE NOT SEEING MUCH IN THE
LINE OF UNACCOMPANIED MINORS
COMING ACROSS IN OUR AREA MOSTLY
BECAUSE THEY HAVE MUCH EASIER
ACCESS THROUGH THE TEXAS
CORRIDOR DOWN AROUND THE
RIO GRANDE.
BUT IF THEY EVER STOP THAT DOWN
THERE, IT WILL BE COMING HERE.
SO WE'RE EXPECTING TO SEE IT
EVENTUALLY.
>> Brown: EXPLAIN THAT BECAUSE
THERE IS A LOT OF TALK ABOUT
BORDER ISSUES IN TEXAS, BUT
YOU'RE WORRIED THAT WHEN IT GETS
TURNED OFF THERE IT MOVES UP TO
WHERE YOU ARE?
>> HISTORICALLY, THAT'S THE WAY
IT'S ALWAYS HAPPENED.
THERE WAS A LOT OF TRAFFIC
THROUGH CALIFORNIA WHEN THEY
SHUT THAT CORRIDOR.
THEY SENT THEM INTO THE ARIZONA
CORRIDORS THINKING IT WOULD BE A
LOT MORE RUGGED AND MORE
DIFFICULT FOR THEM, BUT IT'S
JUST A MATTER OF WHERE THE GATES
ARE OPEN THE MOST, AND WE HAVE,
RUNNING PARALLEL TO THE ARIZONA
BORDER AND NEW MEXICO BORDER, WE
HAVE MEXICAN ROUTE 2 THAT RUNS
FROM MEXICALI TO JUAREZ AND IT'S
EXCELLENT ACCESS FOR ANYTHING
COMING TO THE BORDER.
IN SPOTS IT'S LESS THAN HALF A
MILE FROM THE U.S.-MEXICAN
BORDER.
SO IF THEY DON'T GO THROUGH THE
RIO GRANDE VALLEY, THE NEXT MOST
SUCCESSFUL PLACE IS ALONG OUR
BORDER.
>> Arown: SOUNDS LIKE -- GO
AHEAD.
I'M SORRY.
>> IF THEY PLUG OUR BORDER, THE
NEXT PLACE WILL PROBABLY BE THE
TEXAS BIG BEND AREA, BUT THERE'S
NOT VERY GOOD ACCESS ON THE
MEXICAN SIDE, SO IT'S THE LAST
ONE THAT WILL BE PRESSURED WITH
ANYTHING.
>> Brown: SOUNDS LIKE, FOR
YOU, THE IMMIGRATION AND
PARTICULARLY THE IMMIGRATION OF
MINORS ISN'T SO MUCH THE ISSUE
AS SECURITY OR BORDER SECURITY
IS AND DRUGS.
DEFINE THAT PROBLEM AND HOW
SERIOUS IS IT AND WHAT DO YOU
WANT TO SEE HAPPEN?
>> WELL, BECAUSE MORE AND MORE
SERIOUS THE ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS
IS NOT AS SERIOUS A PROBLEM AS
THE DRUG TRADE AND TRADE FROM
OTHER PEOPLE BEING SMUGGLED IN
FROM OTHER COUNTRIES.
WHEN THEY'RE DRIVEN FARTHER AND
FARTHER OUT INTO THE STICKS TO
CROSS THE BORDER, IT'S BECOMING
MUCH MORE DIFFICULT TO THEM AND
THEY DON'T WANT TO BE CAUGHT OUT
THERE AND THEY DON'T WANT THEIR
TRAILS TO BE INTERRUPTED.
SO IT BECOMES A LITTLE BIT MORE
VIOLENT.
THEY STAND UP TO US A LOT MORE.
AS IT IS NOW, WE DON'T VERY
OFTEN COME IN CONTACT WITH VERY
MANY PEOPLE BECAUSE WE DON'T
WANT TO BE IN CONTACT WITH THEM.
WE JUST WANT TO CALL IT IN AND
SEE IF THE BORDER PATROL CAN
CATCH THEM AFTER THEY'VE COME
ACROSS, RATHER THAN CONFRONTING
THEM OURSELVES LIKE WE USED TO.
THERE'S JUST BEEN TOO MANY
PEOPLE HURT AND TOO MUCH
VIOLENCE GOING ON FOR US TO GET
INVOLVED IN THAT NOW.
>> Brown: SO I WONDER, AS YOU
WATCH AND LISTEN TO THE DEBATE
AROUND THE COUNTRY, WHAT IS IT
THAT YOU WANT THE REST OF THE
COUNTRY TO KNOW OR THAT PERHAPS
IS NOT BEING UNDERSTOOD OR SEEN
CLEARLY FROM WHERE YOU SIT?
>> WELL, THE BORDER IS NOT A
UNIFORM, CONSISTENT SITUATION
ALL THE WAY ACROSS THE BORDER.
SOME PLACES THE FENCE WORKS,
SOME PLACES IT DOESN'T, SOME
PLACES YOU DON'T WANT A FENCE.
EACH PARTICULAR AREA HAS ITS OWN
CHARACTERISTICS AND WILL HAVE TO
BE DEALT WITH DIFFERENTLY.
YOU CAN'T COMPARE THE RO RIO GRE
VALLEY TO THE ARIZONA MOUNTAINS
TO THE DESERTS.
THEY'RE COMPLETELY DIFFERENT.
TAKES DIFFERENT PLANNING AND
DIFFERENT WAYS TO SLOW THE
IMMIGRATION.
WHAT MOST OF OUR PROBLEM IN
ARIZONA IS THE FACT THAT BORDER
PATROL, HI HISTORICALLY, HAS NOT
ACTUALLY TRIED TO ENFORCE THE
INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARY IN THE
RURAL AREAS.
THEY WAIT FOR THEM TO COME
ACROSS, THEN CHASE THEM, TRY TO
APPREHEND THEM AFTER THEY'VE
GONE THROUGH OUR RANCHES AND
CAUSED WHATEVER PROBLEMS THEY'RE
GOING TO CAUSE.
AT THIS POINT, WE NEED THEM ON
THE INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARY
RATHER THAN BACK.
I DON'T MEAN 100% OF THEM.
I MEAN 75% TO 80% OF THE AGENTS.
AS IT IS NOW, THEY'RE TRYING TO
WATCH THEMUTATCH
THEM, THEY JUST WATCH THEM CROSS
AND THEN CHASE THEM TO OUR
PLACES WHICH DOESN'T MAKE A LOT
OF SENSE TO US.
>> Brown: IN OUR LAST 30 OR 40
SECONDS HERE, YOU'VE WATCHED THE
DEBATE GOING ON IN WASHINGTON.
IS THERE ONE THING YOU WOULD
LIKE TO SEE FROM THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT AT THIS POINT?
>> A CHANGE IN POLICY.
A CHANGE IN DEPLOYMENT
STRATEGIES, DEPENDENT UPON THE
PARTICULAR AREAS.
IT'S NOT A ONE-SIZE-FITS-ALL
THING WHERE THEY CONTROL IT ALL
FROM WASHINGTON, D.C.
THE AGENTS' ON THE GROUND MORALE
IS TERRIBLE AFTER THE PROBLEM
WITH THE UNACCOMPANIED MINORS.
YOU KNOW, ILLEGAL CROSSING OF
THE BORDER THE FIRST TIME WHERE
YOU JUST CROSS THE BORDER AND
HAVEN'T DONE ANYTHING ELSE IS
ONLY A MISDEMEANOR.
HOW MUCH RISK AND HOW MUCH
EFFORT DO YOU WANT TO GO TO TO
ENFORCE A MISDEMEANOR?
THERE IS NO WAY TO DIFFERENTIATE
WHETHER THEY'RE CARRYING GUNS,
WHETHER THEY'RE CARRYING
SOMEBODY THAT'S A CRIMINAL OR
SEEKS TO DO HARM IN THE U.S.
SO IT'S VERY DIFFICULT AND IT'S
VERY DISHEARTENING FOR THE
AGENTS THEMSELVES.
THEY GET FRUSTRATED IN WHAT
THEY'RE DOING.
HOW MUCH CONFIDENCE CAN YOU HAVE
WHEN THEY'RE CONTROLLED AND
DECEIVED THE WAY THEY ARE?
>> Brown: GARY THRASHER,
THANKS SO MUCH FOR JOINING US.
>> YOU BET.
THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: WE'LL HAVE MORE
CONVERSATIONS ON THE BORDER
CRISIS SOON.
>> Ifill: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
ISRAEL AND HAMAS AGREED TO AN
OPEN-ENDED CEASE-FIRE THAT MAY
FINALLY END SEVEN WEEKS OF
WARFARE.
THE PRESIDENTS OF RUSSIA AND
UKRAINE MET FACE TO FACE, BUT
THEIR LATE-NIGHT TALKS MADE
LITTLE PROGRESS TOWARD ENDING
THE CRISIS IN UKRAINE.
AND PRESIDENT OBAMA AND OTHER
TOP OFFICIALS STOPPED SHORT OF
CONFIRMING REPORTS OF U.S.
SURVEILLANCE FLIGHTS OVER SYRIA.
THEY COULD LEAD TO AIR-STRIKES
AGAINST THE ISLAMIC STATE GROUP.
ON THE NEWSHOUR ONLINE RIGHT
NOW, SINGER-SONGWRITER VALERIE
JUNE'S ANTHEM FOR WORKING WOMEN
WAS INSPIRED BY THE HEROINES IN
HER LIFE: HER MOTHER,
GRANDMOTHER AND EVEN THE SMALL
BUSINESSWOMEN SHE'S WORKED FOR.
SEATTLE'S K.E.X.P. RECORDED A
RECENT PERFORMANCE.
YOU CAN WATCH THAT ON ART BEAT.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
SITE, newshour.pbs.org.
AND THAT'S THE NEWSHOUR FOR
TONIGHT.
ON WEDNESDAY, WE'LL HAVE ANOTHER
REPORT FROM MARGARET WARNER IN
NORTHERN IRAQ, AND WE'LL TAKE A
LOOK AT WHAT IT TAKES TO FREE
CAPTURED AMERICANS.
I'M GWEN IFILL, WE'LL SEE YOU
ON-LINE, AND AGAIN HERE TOMORROW
EVENING.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.